\section{General Features}
There are a number of control features for the various video modes
that are done in a unified fashion. These features are layering and
transparency, palettes, scrolling, and clipping. For the sake of
convenience we will occasionally talk about a global coordinate system
for graphics on the ZX Next. This coordinate system has (0, 0) at the
upper left corner of the usable display area and (319, 255) at the
lower right corner. Individual pixels generally correspond to integer
locations in this grid, but some modes may either double or halve this
grid. This will be discussed in the sections for each of the video
layers.

\subsection{Video Layering and Transparency}
Video for the ZX Next is composed of a number of features and layers
each of which may have its own set of video modes. Not all of these
features are mandatory.

By composing together the border colour and transparency fallback
color, layer 1 (ULA, Timex modes, or LoRes), layer 2
($256\times192\times256$, $320\times256\times256$, or
$640\times256\times6$), layer 3 (16 or 2 colour tiles), and sprites;
we generate the full video display.

The border/transparency fallback is the bottom with the ordering of
the layers controlled by a combination of the video layering register
(Next register \$15 (21) bits 4-2), the interaction of layers 1 and 3
(Next register \$6B (107) bit 0), and whether or not a pixel in layer
2 is set as a priority colour.

\input{registers/tbblue/15.tex}

\index{transparency}
Transparency for Layer 2, Layer 1, and 1-bit Tilemaps are
controlled by Next register \$14 (20) and defaults to \$E3. Sprites
and 4-bit Tilemaps have their own registers (\$4B and \$4C
respectively) for setting their transparency index (not colour). This
colour ignores the state of the least significant blue bit, so \$E3
equates to both \$1C6 and \$1C7. For Sprites and Tilemaps transparency
is determined by colour index. For Sprites this is controlled by
register \$4B (with only the least significant 4-bits being relevant
for 16-colour Sprites). For Tilemaps, the transparency index is set by
register \$4C. If all layers are transparent, the transparency
fallback colour is displayed. This is set by register \$4A.

\input{registers/tbblue/14.tex}
\input{registers/tbblue/4A.tex}
\input{registers/tbblue/4B.tex}
\input{registers/tbblue/4C.tex}

\subsection{Palette}
\index{palette}
\paragraph{Next Colour Palettes}
Each video mode group has a pair of palettes assigned to it a primary
and an alternate palette. Each palette entry is actually a 9-bit value
(RRRGGGBBB) and can be set by selecting a palette using nextreg \$43
(palette control), the entry using nextreg \$40 (palette index), then
writing the value into nextreg \$44 (palette value, 9-bit) using pairs
of consecutive writes for each palette value or nextreg \$41 (palette
value, 8-bit). Once a palette index has been selected writes
automatically increment the palette index number so it is possible to
efficiently write the values for a collection of palette entries.

\input{registers/tbblue/40.tex}
\input{registers/tbblue/41.tex}
\input{registers/tbblue/43.tex}
\input{registers/tbblue/44.tex}

\subsection{Scrolling}
The ZX Spectrum Next has four sets of scrolling registers to
independently contol the display offsets of various video modes
(Layer2, ULA, Tilemap, and LoRes). When the video is offset, the
portion that is pushed off the screen (to the left and or top) then
becomes visible on the opposite side of the screen so that the video
offset values are effectively the coordinates of the origin in a
toroidal universe.

\subsection{Clipping}
The ZX Spectrum Next has four clipping registers create a window of
the layer that is visible. Clipping is managed by a set of four
successive writes to the clipping register applicable for the video
mode. If a section is masked off by clipping, it is as if the area
were the transparency colour and the video lyers behind it become
visible.
